

                       BITING/PIERCING ARTHROPODS


1. BLACK WIDOW SPIDER
(Latrodectus mactans)

    [Illustration: (unlabelled)]

Identification. The female black widow has a shiny black body,
approximately 1.5 cm (0.6 in) long, and usually a red hourglass-shaped
marking on the underside of her globose abdomen. On some individuals the
distinct hourglass marking is replaced with several triangles or spots
or an irregular longitudinal blotch. She has slim black legs with a span
of 4 cm (1.5 in). The male is considerably smaller than the female,
usually a patterned brown color, and is not a threat to man.

Distribution. _Latrodectus mactans_ is found in every state except
Alaska; however, most reported human fatalities have occurred in the
Southeastern States.[14, 15]

Biology/Behavior. The black widow is generally found in its
irregular-shaped web near the ground. Common web sites are under stones,
loose bark, or water faucets or in wood piles, rodent burrows, garages,
storage buildings, outhouses, and barns. Most human envenomizations
occur when the spider is inadvertently trapped against part of the body
or when the web is accidentally touched.

Avoidance/Control. Frequent cleaning to remove spiders and their webs
from buildings and outdoor living areas will decrease the possibility of
accidental bites. Routine hose washings of potential spider habitats,
such as under steps and around windows and doors, will discourage the
black widow from locating in these places. When working in
spider-infested areas, wear gloves and a long-sleeved shirt. If
warranted, the outside or inside of a building may be sprayed with an
approved insecticide. Apply the spray around windows, stairs, closets,
or other spider habitats in accordance with instructions on the
manufacturer’s label.

Envenomization Reaction/Treatment. (See appendix.)


2. BROWN RECLUSE SPIDER
(Loxosceles reclusa)

    [Illustration: (unlabelled)]

Identification. The brown recluse is a medium-sized spider with a 2- to
4-cm (0.8-1.6 in) legspan and a color range from yellow tan to dark
brown. The most distinguishing characteristics are six eyes (most
spiders have eight eyes) arranged in a semicircle of three pairs on top
of the head, and a violin-shaped marking extending from the area of the
eyes to the abdomen.

Distribution. Brown recluse spiders occur throughout an area of the
Southcentral States, including Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Ohio, Oklahoma, Mississippi,
Missouri, Tennessee, and Texas. Localized populations of this spider,
probably imported from the Southcentral States, have been reported from
Arizona, Wyoming, California, Florida, New Jersey, North Carolina,
Pennsylvania, and Washington, D.C. Due to the mobility of the United
States citizenry, specimens can be easily transported in household goods
from the spider’s home range in the Southcentral United States to any
other area of the country. Under favorable conditions the relocated
spiders can survive for an extended period of time and possibly become
established.

Biology/Behavior. Within its range, the brown recluse spider will
readily establish populations inside parts of buildings which are
generally dry, littered, and undisturbed for long periods of time. The
spider also can be found outside in protected areas (under rocks and
loose bark). Members of this species are nonaggressive and normally
attempt to escape whenever they are threatened. Thus, most instances of
bites occur when the spider is inadvertently trapped, such as when the
victim puts on clothing in which the spider is hiding, steps on a
wandering spider at night, or cleans closets or other storage areas
where the spider resides.

Avoidance/Control. Any of the following actions will help prevent
contact with the brown recluse spider: shake out clothing and bedding
before use; eliminate collections of papers and unused boxes; thoroughly
clean beneath and behind furniture; remove spiders, webs, and egg cases
from living and storage areas; and properly use appropriate
insecticides.

Envenomization Reaction/Treatment. (See appendix.)


3. CENTIPEDES
(Class: Chilopoda)

    [Illustration: (unlabelled)]

Identification. Centipedes are multisegmented elongate arthropods with a
distinct head and one pair of legs, or appendages, per segment. Size is
species dependent, with body length ranging from approximately 2.5 to 25
cm (1-10 in) or more. The number of legs can therefore vary from 15 to
100 pairs or more, depending upon the species.

Distribution. The range of centipedes varies with the species; however,
these arthropods are most numerous in the southern half of the United
States.

Biology/Behavior. Throughout the day, centipedes hide under rocks,
boards, or bark and in cracks, crevices, closets, basements, and other
moist, protected locations. At night, they come out of hiding to hunt
for prey which usually consists of insects and other small arthropods.
Centipedes inject venom through two powerful claws located on the
ventral side of the body immediately behind the head. Contrary to
popular belief, centipedes cannot inject venom through their numerous
legs. The majority of centipedes found in the United States are small
and not a threat to man. Human centipede envenomizations occur when a
relatively large centipede is accidentally picked up, stepped on, or
otherwise trapped against the body.

Avoidance/Control. When camping in a centipede-infested area, carefully
invert and shake out sleeping bags, clothes, or other items left in
contact with the ground. Always wear shoes when walking about at night,
and wear leather gloves when moving rocks or trash from the ground.
Usually centipedes are not sufficiently numerous in any one location to
warrant chemical control.

Envenomization Reaction/Treatment. (See appendix.)


4. CONENOSE OR KISSING BUGS
(_Triatoma_ spp.)

    [Illustration: (unlabelled)]

Identification. Species of the genus _Triatoma_ have the elongate
(cone-shaped) head which is characteristic of the family Reduviidae.
Hence, the name “conenose bugs” is often used to describe these insects.
Orange and black markings are usually present where the abdomen extends
laterally past the folded wings. These insects are flattened dorsally,
and this trait allows them to effectively hide in small cracks and
crevices. The size of mature adults varies from approximately 1 to 3 cm
(0.4-1.2 in) depending upon the species.

Distribution. _Triatoma_ species that attack humans are generally
located in the southern half of the United States.

Biology/Behavior. Conenose bugs are nocturnal insects. They take their
blood meals at night and hide in any available crack or crevice between
feedings. _Triatoma_, as a group, normally feed on small mammals; but in
the absence of their preferred hosts, several species will readily feed
on humans. They are commonly referred to as “kissing bugs” because their
blood meals are occasionally taken from the area around the human lips.
Some of the common sites of human attack, in order of frequency, are the
hands, arms, feet, head, and trunk. This feeding pattern can be expected
since kissing bugs have not been found to feed through clothing.[30]

Avoidance/Control. Since these bugs can feed undetected on a sleeping
victim, it is difficult to avoid their attack in heavily infested areas.
Exposure to kissing bugs can be minimized, however, by destroying
underbrush, rubbish, wood rats’ nests, and any other small-animal
habitat located near a residence.[27] When an infestation is detected
inside a house, two or three treatments with an appropriate insecticide
at 10-day intervals should provide control. To obtain the best results,
thoroughly treat all windows, baseboards, walls, cracks, crevices, and
bedsprings.

Envenomization Reaction/Treatment. (See appendix.)


5. WHEEL BUG
(_Arilus cristatus_)

    [Illustration: (unlabelled)]

Identification. _Arilus cristatus_ has the small narrow head
characteristic of the Reduviidae family of Hemiptera (true bugs). This
insect is mouse gray in color and approximately 2.5 to 4 cm (1-1.6 in)
long. A cogwheel-like crest on the dorsal side of the prothorax is
distinctive to this insect and accounts for its popular name, “wheel
bug.”

Distribution. Wheel bugs are generally found in the southern two-thirds
of the United States.

Biology/Behavior. Wheel bugs are predacious on soft-bodied insects.
Human envenomizations are usually the result of accidental contact while
handling vegetation, boards, or other objects. The bug penetrates the
skin with its “beak,” or proboscis, and injects a salivary fluid
normally used in killing its insect prey.[31]

Avoidance/Control. The best way to prevent wheel bug contact is to be
able to identify this unusual insect and avoid it. Children should be
instructed not to handle it. Wearing leather gloves while working
outside will prevent bites which occur when the wheel bug is
accidentally picked up with vegetation or other debris. Since wheel bugs
are predacious on many harmful insects and are generally considered
beneficial, control is not recommended.

Envenomization Reaction/Treatment. Wheel bug bites are characterized by
immediate intense pain which usually subsides in 3 to 6 hours. Since all
reported bite reactions have been localized and self-limiting, specific
treatment measures are not provided for _A. cristatus_ bites. However,
anaphylactic shock has resulted from the bite of other Hemiptera and
should be considered a possibility with wheel bug bites.[12]




                          STINGING ARTHROPODS


1. ANTS
(Order: Hymenoptera; Family: Formicidae)

    [Illustration: Fire Ant Mound]

    [Illustration: Harvester Ant Mound]

Identification. Like other Hymenoptera, females of dangerous ant species
have a stinger at the posterior tip of the abdomen. Their constricted
“waist” between the thorax and posterior abdomen and their elbowed
antennae distinguish them from similar insects. The dangerous United
States species belong to genera _Solenopsis_ (fire ants) or
_Pogonomyrmex_ (harvester ants). The easiest way to distinguish these
ants is by their mounds. Fire ants build elevated earthen mounds 8-90 cm
(3-36 in) high, leaving the surrounding vegetation relatively
undisturbed. In contrast, harvester ant mounds are usually flat or
slightly elevated and are surrounded by a defoliated area 0.6-3 m (2-10
ft) or more in diameter. Also, harvester ants are 2 to 3 times larger
than fire ants.

Distribution. The Florida harvester ant, _P. badius_, distributed
throughout the Southeastern States, is the only harvester ant known to
occur east of the Mississippi River. West of the Mississippi, the red
harvester ant (_P. barbatus_), the California harvester ant (_P.
californicus_), and the western harvester ant (_P. occidentalis_) are
found in different individualized distribution areas. The two most
important fire ant species were introduced into the United States from
South America. The red imported fire ant (_S. invicta_) was introduced
about 1940 and is well established in the Southeastern States.
Currently, this ant infests Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia,
Louisiana, Mississippi, North and South Carolina, and Texas. The black
imported fire ant (_S. richteri_) was introduced about 1918; its
distribution is limited to an area in northeastern Mississippi and
northwestern Alabama. Two less important native species, _S. geminata_
(tropical or native fire ant) and _S. xyloni_ (southern fire ant), occur
in localized areas of a few southern states.

Biology/Behavior. Ants of the _Solenopsis_ and _Pogonomyrmex_ genera are
diurnal soil-inhabiting insects that prefer to nest in open areas. These
ants are social insects; their colonies consist of at least one
reproductive queen, several males, and many nonreproductive female
workers. Fire and harvester ants are particularly dangerous because
workers defending their nest can inflict repeated stings, and multiple
human envenomizations may occur when a victim comes in contact with a
mound.

Avoidance/Control. Familiarization with the appearance of the ant mounds
is necessary in order to avoid them and prevent accidental
envenomizations. Since small children are often the victims of multiple
stings, parents should insure that the mounds of dangerous ant species
are not present in play areas. This is particularly important where the
red imported fire ant occurs. Mound treatments with mirex have been
effective in controlling _Solenopsis_ and _Pogonomyrmex_ ants. The
Environmental Protection Agency limits the use of this insecticide, and
it must be applied in strict accordance with EPA and product label
instructions.

Envenomization Reaction/Treatment. (See appendix.)


2. BEES
(Order: Hymenoptera; Family: Apidae)

    [Illustration: (unlabelled)]

Identification. Two families of bees are commonly associated with human
envenomization: Apidae (honey bees and bumble bees) and Halictidae
(sweat bees). Only the honey bees and bumble bees are considered
dangerous. Both are robust hairy insects with two pairs of membranous
wings which they hold at an angular position over the body when at rest.
Microscopic examination shows that bee thoracic hairs are individually
“feathered.” In contrast, wasp thoracic hairs are smooth.

Distribution. Dangerous species of bees are distributed throughout the
United States.

Biology/Behavior. 1. Honey Bees. Since these insects are not native to
this continent, north of Mexico, all original honey bee colonies in the
United States were imported. _Apis mellifera_, the cosmopolitan bee of
commerce, is responsible for most bee stings and many deaths.[10] This
species is separated into several races, with the gold Italian and the
black or gray Caucasian races making up the majority of the bees found
in this country.[5] The aggressive Brazilian (hybrid African) bee is
currently restricted to the South American continent. Honey bees are
highly social insects. Their colony consists of an egg-laying queen,
drones to fertilize the queen, and workers to gather food and care for
the young. Honey bees can release “alarm odors” associated with the
sting gland, which cause other bees in the vicinity of an odor-marked
victim to attack and inflict multiple stings. Unlike other hymenopterous
insects, the honey bee worker has a barbed stinger and can sting only
once; to escape, the bee must leave its entire stinging apparatus
attached to the skin of its victim. As important pollinators of crops,
honey bees are very beneficial to man.

2. Bumble Bees. The bumble bees are considered to be the most primitive
of the social bees. Their colonies lack much of the structure and highly
evolved behavior of the honey bees; however, like the honey bees, the
bumble bees are diurnal plant feeders and important pollinators of
crops. A typical colony consists of at least one queen, several males,
and numerous workers. Only young fertilized queens survive the winter to
establish new colonies the next spring. The nests are normally located
deep in undisturbed ground, like fence rows, and are supplied with a
mixture of pollen and honey. During late summer, a colony usually
contains between 100 and 500 bees. Although bumble bees are 2 to 3 times
larger than honey bees, they are neither as aggressive nor as abundant
as the honey bees, and therefore not as dangerous.

Avoidance/Control. The best way to avoid Hymenoptera stings is to
prevent human contact with these insects. This is especially important
for persons hypersensitive to bee venom. Some preventive steps are:

  1 Avoid outdoor activities in unfamiliar areas where stinging insects
  are known to occur.

  2 When outdoors, don’t use floral-scented cosmetic products or leave
  sweet beverages or foods exposed in areas where they might attract
  bees.

  3 Avoid garbage collection areas, which attract Hymenoptera.

  4 When outdoors, always wear shoes and, if possible, a long-sleeved
  shirt, long pants, or other protective clothing. Don’t wear clothing
  with a bright floral print or loose-fitting clothing in which stinging
  insects may be trapped.

  5 Don’t make rapid movements around stinging insects or intentionally
  disturb either the insects or their nests.

  6 Eliminate all Hymenoptera nests around inhabited areas (wild honey
  bee colonies may be removed by a local beekeeper). When necessary, an
  insecticide such as 5% carbaryl dust may be applied in a nesting area
  within a building to eliminate the nuisance colony.

  7 Educate young children on the hazards of venomous arthropods.

Envenomization Reaction/Treatment. (See appendix.)


3. SCORPIONS
(Class: Arachnida; Order: Scorpionida)

    [Illustration: (unlabelled)]

Identification. Scorpions are crablike in appearance, with pincers
attached to their two front appendages. They also possess a
five-segmented “tail” terminating in a bulbous structure with a
prominent stinger. The body size of mature scorpions varies from 2 to 10
cm (0.8-4 in) or more, depending upon the species.

Distribution. Scorpions are most prevalent in warmer climates. In the
United States the two most dangerous scorpion species, _Centruroides
sculpturatus_ and _C. gertschi_, have been found only in Arizona.

Biology/Behavior. During daylight hours scorpions hide under objects or
debris on the ground. At night, they come out of hiding to search for
food, which consists primarily of ground-inhabiting arthropods. The prey
is grasped with the pincers and stung by rapidly bringing the stinger
forward directly over the head. This quick stinging motion is also used
for defense, as is usually the case with human envenomizations.

Avoidance/Control. To avoid stings in scorpion-infested areas: remove
accumulations of boards, rocks, and other debris; wear leather gloves to
remove any item from the ground; inspect and shake out clothing or shoes
before donning them; and when moving about at night, turn on lights to
avoid contacting these nocturnally active arthropods. Insecticides that
are commonly used for household cockroach control are also useful for
controlling scorpions. Special care should be taken to treat around all
baseboards thoroughly.

Envenomization Reaction/Treatment. (See appendix.)